README.md, before:

Introduction
============

Penguard is an application that allows users to monitor objects and
informs them when these objects get too far away from them. This can be
used as a theft alarm or as an aid to prevent forgetting objects.

While this principle is widely applicable, the idea stems from the need
to guard a plush penguin mascot at an event and prevent it from being
stolen. In the style of this particular use case, the objects to be
monitored will henceforth be called “penguins”, while the people
monitoring them will be called “guardians”.

Penguins can be guarded by several guardians at once, in which case it
is sufficient for the penguin to be “seen” by one of them. Also,
guardians can monitor several penguins at once. The guardians should
know at all times which other guardians see which penguins.

We want to be able to use any kind of bluetooth device as a penguin. The
only requirements should be that it supports bluetooth, and that it
doesn’t automatically turn off bluetooth after a while of inactivity,
even when no device is paired to it.

As an extension, penguins should be able to detect when they are “lost”
and act upon it. This obviously contradicts the goal to support any
bluetooth device. We could support both options by adding an optional
protocol, the Penguard Penguin Protocol, through which penguins can
communicate with the guardians. When the penguin supports the protocol,
it can detect and act upon being lost, otherwise not. We want to keep
this option in mind and implement it if we have enough time.

The major challenges will be

-   Implementing a peer-to-peer protocol for the guardians

-   Detecting bluetooth devices and “tracking” them without making more
    assumptions on them

-   (optional) Implementing a protocol for the penguins to talk to the
    guardians

System Overview
===============

A Penguard group consists of

-   One or more guardians guarding the penguins

-   Zero or more penguins being guarded

Guardians can be part of at most one group at once. Penguins not
supporting the Penguard Penguin Protocol can be part of more than one
group–this cannot be prevented. Penguins supporting the Penguard Penguin
Protocol can only be part of one group. It is theoretically possible for
a second group to add it as a penguin not supporting the protocol,
though.

The guardians communicate with each other via Internet using a
peer-to-peer protocol (the Penguard Guardian Protocol). They can
discover each other by using a Penguard Liaison server. The Liaison
server stores the guardians’ IP addresses and ports and is used to poke
holes when the guardians are behind a NAT.

The guardians can detect whether a penguin is in range by using
Bluetooth RSSI. That means that guardians are not required to pair with
penguins.

Penguins can optionally implement the Penguard Penguin Protocol, which
is a Bluetooth Low Energy protocol. The guardians act as clients to the
Penguins. The guardians will ping the Penguins regularly, such that the
penguin can detect when it is lost by using a timeout. The penguin
should also advertise what kind of information it requires from the
guardians, which the guardians then must send to it. This information
can include phone numbers, email addresses or similar information and
should allow for the penguin to contact the guardians when it is lost.

The guardians should be able to find out whether any given penguin
supports the Penguard Penguin Protocol.

System components
-----------------

Penguard Android Application

:   is an Android app required to use Penguard. The app can act as a
    guardian or as a penguin (guardian mode or penguin mode). When
    acting as a penguin, it optionally supports the Penguard
    Penguin Protocol. If it does, the user should be able to select what
    the app should do when the penguin is lost. Options include sounding
    an alarm and sending GPS coordinates to the guardians via SMS. When
    acting as a guardian, the application provides an user interface
    that displays the status of each monitored penguin. The status
    includes the signal strength (RSSI) and which of the other guardians
    see that specific penguin.

Penguard Guardian service

:   is part of the Penguard Android Application. It is a service that
    runs in the background. It handles all Guardian tasks, i.e.
    monitoring penguins and communicating with other guardians.

Guardians

:   monitor the penguins using the Penguard app in guardian mode. The
    term “guardian” refers to the Penguard Guardian service or the user
    using the Penguard Android application

Penguins

:   are bluetooth devices. They are registered with the guardians and
    then monitored. They optionally support the Penguard Penguin
    Protocol, allowing them to take actions when they are lost.

Penguard Liaison Server

:   allows guardians to find each other easily. Guardians register with
    the Penguard Liaison Server (henceforth referred to as PLS). The
    server keeps a list of all currently active Penguard users. When
    starting the Penguard app, guardians will register with the PLS
    which stores their username, unique UUID and IP address/port. When a
    guardian wishes to contact another, he asks the PLS to establish
    a connection. The PLS will look up the other guardian and send him a
    connection request plus the first guardian’s IP/port. The second
    guardian can then choose to contact the first or not. From that
    point on, the PLS is no longer involved in communication.

Calibration (optional)
----------------------

According to Wikipedia, “There is no standardized relationship of any
particular physical parameter to the RSSI reading.” [@rssi_varies_wiki].
See also [@rssi_varies_article]. Since the range of RSSI values varies
between devices, it should be possible for guardians to calibrate
themselves. That is done in a guided process where the penguin is first
brought close to the guardian and then slowly carried away. We can then
take measurements of the bluetooth signal strength at certain time
intervals and calibrate the guardian that way.

Penguard Guardian Protocol
--------------------------

The Penguard Guardian Protocol (henceforth referred to as PGP) allows
guardians to form groups, and it allows guardians within the same group
to communicate.

### Forming groups

Every guardian is automatically in a group, even when he is alone and
not guarding penguins.

Larger groups are formed by merging two existing groups. To do that, one
guardian from group A contacts one guardian from group B. The second
guardian can confirm or deny the group merge. Once confirmed, the
guardian from group B sends all information on group B to the guardian
from group A. The latter now knows all the information of the new,
merged group, and broadcasts that to every member of the new merged
group. All participants then update their status.

### Communicating

When a guardian is registered with a group, it will immediately start
sending its status to the other group members. The status includes
information about which of the penguins currently guarded it sees. It
will also receive similar status updates from other group members. These
status updates are rather frequent and it won’t hurt when some are lost.

Other messages (for example a group merge or addition of a penguin) are
more important and it needs to be ensured that every guardian within the
group gets them. To ensure this, we plan to implement an atomic
commitment protocol. If the transaction aborts, the user initiating it
will get an error message and the option to try again.

Penguard Penguin Protocol (optional)
------------------------------------

The Penguard Penguin Protocol (henceforth referred to as PPP) allows for
penguins to detect when they are lost.

It is a Bluetooth Low Energy protocol.

The penguin should advertise that he supports the PPP. It can be
activated and deactivated.

Once activated, the penguin enters its active state. In this state, it
will listen for pings from the guardians and acknowledge them. The
guardians must send these pings regularly. When the penguin does not
receive a ping for long enough, it will consider itself lost and enter
its lost state. Once it receives another ping, it will transition back
to active state.

When deactivated, the penguin will go in its inactive state. In that
state, the penguin will reply to pings saying that it is inactive.

The penguin can also tell the guardians which information it would like
to receive from the guardians. The guardians will poll for this
information once. They will then send the required information to the
penguin. The required information should not change.

The PPP and all components using it are considered optional, meaning
that this will be the first thing we strip of the project when time is
not sufficient.

Requirements
============

During this project, we will need the following hardware:

-   Several Android smartphones

-   Several Bluetooth devices

-   A server (kindly provided by VSOS)

We will rely on Java for development of the Android app and Python for
the Liaison Server.

We will need the following software:

-   Android Studio

Work Packages
=============

-   <span>**WP1**</span>: Local penguin tracking

-   <span>**WP2**</span>: Low-level networking

-   <span>**WP3**</span>: PGP - protocol design

-   <span>**WP4**</span>: Penguard guardian service implementation

-   <span>**WP5**</span>: PLS implementation

-   <span>**WP6**</span>: Functional graphical user interface for the
    Penguard app

-   <span>**WP7**</span>: (optional) calibration functionality for
    guardians

-   <span>**WP8**</span>: (optional) PPP - protocol design and
    implementation

-   <span>**WP9**</span>: Field testing

-   <span>**WP10**</span>: Presentation

Distribution of work
====================

In this section we will list the distribution of work packages on our
group members. This distribution is not definitive, but should serve as
a guideline for who works on which parts, and, most importantly, how
many people will need to work on the individual work packages.
Generally, we have assigned people according to their interests. We have
tried to give everyone an equal share of work. The optional work
packages are not listed, since those will be used to even out the amount
of work everyone has.

-   **WP1**: Nicole

-   **WP2**: Nils

-   **WP3**: Aline, Sascha, Luca

-   **WP4**: Aline, Sascha

-   **WP5**: Luca

-   **WP6**: Nicole, Nils

-   **WP9**: Everyone

-   **WP10**: Everyone

Milestones
==========

-   **Phase 1**: Define goals and work plan

-   **Phase 2**: WP1, WP2, WP3–Protocol design (PGP), Intent flow design
    (Android app), implement penguin scan and discovery routines,
    implement simple networking routines in Android app (packet
    dispatcher and listener).

-   **Phase 3**: WP4, WP5–Implement Penguard Guardian service (routines
    for sending status messages, atomic commitment protocol), implement
    PLS

-   **Phase 4**: WP4, WP6, WP7–Implement various events (group merge,
    penguin add...), refine UI, implement calibration routine

-   **Phase 5** (optional): WP8–Design and implement PPP

-   **Phase 6**: WP9, WP10–Extensive field testing, prepare presentation

Deliveries
==========

We expect to deliver the following:

-   Code for the Penguard Android application

-   Code for the PLS

-   Documentation for the PGP

-   (optional) Documentation for the PPP

-   Slides for the one-minute presentation

Commit message:

Added the "phone etc without pairing" reference.

README.md, after:

Introduction
============

Penguard is an application that allows users to monitor objects and
informs them when these objects get too far away from them. This can be
used as a theft alarm or as an aid to prevent forgetting objects.

While this principle is widely applicable, the idea stems from the need
to guard a plush penguin mascot at an event and prevent it from being
stolen. In the style of this particular use case, the objects to be
monitored will henceforth be called “penguins”, while the people
monitoring them will be called “guardians”.

Penguins can be guarded by several guardians at once, in which case it
is sufficient for the penguin to be “seen” by one of them. Also,
guardians can monitor several penguins at once. The guardians should
know at all times which other guardians see which penguins.

We want to be able to use any kind of bluetooth device as a penguin. The
only requirements should be that it supports bluetooth, and that it
doesn’t automatically turn off bluetooth after a while of inactivity,
even when no device is paired to it.

As an extension, penguins should be able to detect when they are “lost”
and act upon it. This obviously contradicts the goal to support any
bluetooth device. We could support both options by adding an optional
protocol, the Penguard Penguin Protocol, through which penguins can
communicate with the guardians. When the penguin supports the protocol,
it can detect and act upon being lost, otherwise not. We want to keep
this option in mind and implement it if we have enough time.

The major challenges will be

-   Implementing a peer-to-peer protocol for the guardians

-   Detecting bluetooth devices and “tracking” them without making more
    assumptions on them

-   (optional) Implementing a protocol for the penguins to talk to the
    guardians

System Overview
===============

A Penguard group consists of

-   One or more guardians guarding the penguins

-   Zero or more penguins being guarded

Guardians can be part of at most one group at once. Penguins not
supporting the Penguard Penguin Protocol can be part of more than one
group–this cannot be prevented. Penguins supporting the Penguard Penguin
Protocol can only be part of one group. It is theoretically possible for
a second group to add it as a penguin not supporting the protocol,
though.

The guardians communicate with each other via Internet using a
peer-to-peer protocol (the Penguard Guardian Protocol). They can
discover each other by using a Penguard Liaison server. The Liaison
server stores the guardians’ IP addresses and ports and is used to poke
holes when the guardians are behind a NAT.

The guardians can detect whether a penguin is in range by using
Bluetooth RSSI. When detection is done this way, there is no need for
bluetooth pairing [@raspi_RSSI].

Penguins can optionally implement the Penguard Penguin Protocol, which
is a Bluetooth Low Energy protocol. The guardians act as clients to the
Penguins. The guardians will ping the Penguins regularly, such that the
penguin can detect when it is lost by using a timeout. The penguin
should also advertise what kind of information it requires from the
guardians, which the guardians then must send to it. This information
can include phone numbers, email addresses or similar information and
should allow for the penguin to contact the guardians when it is lost.

he guardians should be able to find out whether any given penguin
supports the Penguard Penguin Protocol.

System components
-----------------

Penguard Android Application

:   is an Android app required to use Penguard. The app can act as a
    guardian or as a penguin (guardian mode or penguin mode). When
    acting as a penguin, it optionally supports the Penguard
    Penguin Protocol. If it does, the user should be able to select what
    the app should do when the penguin is lost. Options include sounding
    an alarm and sending GPS coordinates to the guardians via SMS. When
    acting as a guardian, the application provides an user interface
    that displays the status of each monitored penguin. The status
    includes the signal strength (RSSI) and which of the other guardians
    see that specific penguin.

Penguard Guardian service

:   is part of the Penguard Android Application. It is a service that
    runs in the background. It handles all Guardian tasks, i.e.
    monitoring penguins and communicating with other guardians.

Guardians

:   monitor the penguins using the Penguard app in guardian mode. The
    term “guardian” refers to the Penguard Guardian service or the user
    using the Penguard Android application

Penguins

:   are bluetooth devices. They are registered with the guardians and
    then monitored. They optionally support the Penguard Penguin
    Protocol, allowing them to take actions when they are lost.

Penguard Liaison Server

:   allows guardians to find each other easily. Guardians register with
    the Penguard Liaison Server (henceforth referred to as PLS). The
    server keeps a list of all currently active Penguard users. When
    starting the Penguard app, guardians will register with the PLS
    which stores their username, unique UUID and IP address/port. When a
    guardian wishes to contact another, he asks the PLS to establish
    a connection. The PLS will look up the other guardian and send him a
    connection request plus the first guardian’s IP/port. The second
    guardian can then choose to contact the first or not. From that
    point on, the PLS is no longer involved in communication.

Calibration (optional)
----------------------

According to Wikipedia, “There is no standardized relationship of any
particular physical parameter to the RSSI reading.” [@rssi_varies_wiki].
See also [@rssi_varies_article]. Since the range of RSSI values varies
between devices, it should be possible for guardians to calibrate
themselves. That is done in a guided process where the penguin is first
brought close to the guardian and then slowly carried away. We can then
take measurements of the bluetooth signal strength at certain time
intervals and calibrate the guardian that way.

Penguard Guardian Protocol
--------------------------

The Penguard Guardian Protocol (henceforth referred to as PGP) allows
guardians to form groups, and it allows guardians within the same group
to communicate.

### Forming groups

Every guardian is automatically in a group, even when he is alone and
not guarding penguins.

Larger groups are formed by merging two existing groups. To do that, one
guardian from group A contacts one guardian from group B. The second
guardian can confirm or deny the group merge. Once confirmed, the
guardian from group B sends all information on group B to the guardian
from group A. The latter now knows all the information of the new,
merged group, and broadcasts that to every member of the new merged
group. All participants then update their status.

### Communicating

When a guardian is registered with a group, it will immediately start
sending its status to the other group members. The status includes
information about which of the penguins currently guarded it sees. It
will also receive similar status updates from other group members. These
status updates are rather frequent and it won’t hurt when some are lost.

Other messages (for example a group merge or addition of a penguin) are
more important and it needs to be ensured that every guardian within the
group gets them. To ensure this, we plan to implement an atomic
commitment protocol. If the transaction aborts, the user initiating it
will get an error message and the option to try again.

Penguard Penguin Protocol (optional)
------------------------------------

The Penguard Penguin Protocol (henceforth referred to as PPP) allows for
penguins to detect when they are lost.

It is a Bluetooth Low Energy protocol.

The penguin should advertise that he supports the PPP. It can be
activated and deactivated.

Once activated, the penguin enters its active state. In this state, it
will listen for pings from the guardians and acknowledge them. The
guardians must send these pings regularly. When the penguin does not
receive a ping for long enough, it will consider itself lost and enter
its lost state. Once it receives another ping, it will transition back
to active state.

When deactivated, the penguin will go in its inactive state. In that
state, the penguin will reply to pings saying that it is inactive.

The penguin can also tell the guardians which information it would like
to receive from the guardians. The guardians will poll for this
information once. They will then send the required information to the
penguin. The required information should not change.

The PPP and all components using it are considered optional, meaning
that this will be the first thing we strip of the project when time is
not sufficient.

Requirements
============

During this project, we will need the following hardware:

-   Several Android smartphones

-   Several Bluetooth devices

-   A server (kindly provided by VSOS)

We will rely on Java for development of the Android app and Python for
the Liaison Server.

We will need the following software:

-   Android Studio

Work Packages
=============

-   <span>**WP1**</span>: Local penguin tracking

-   <span>**WP2**</span>: Low-level networking

-   <span>**WP3**</span>: PGP - protocol design

-   <span>**WP4**</span>: Penguard guardian service implementation

-   <span>**WP5**</span>: PLS implementation

-   <span>**WP6**</span>: Functional graphical user interface for the
    Penguard app

-   <span>**WP7**</span>: (optional) calibration functionality for
    guardians

-   <span>**WP8**</span>: (optional) PPP - protocol design and
    implementation

-   <span>**WP9**</span>: Field testing

-   <span>**WP10**</span>: Presentation

Distribution of work
====================

In this section we will list the distribution of work packages on our
group members. This distribution is not definitive, but should serve as
a guideline for who works on which parts, and, most importantly, how
many people will need to work on the individual work packages.
Generally, we have assigned people according to their interests. We have
tried to give everyone an equal share of work. The optional work
packages are not listed, since those will be used to even out the amount
of work everyone has.

-   **WP1**: Nicole

-   **WP2**: Nils

-   **WP3**: Aline, Sascha, Luca

-   **WP4**: Aline, Sascha

-   **WP5**: Luca

-   **WP6**: Nicole, Nils

-   **WP9**: Everyone

-   **WP10**: Everyone

Milestones
==========

-   **Phase 1**: Define goals and work plan

-   **Phase 2**: WP1, WP2, WP3–Protocol design (PGP), Intent flow design
    (Android app), implement penguin scan and discovery routines,
    implement simple networking routines in Android app (packet
    dispatcher and listener).

-   **Phase 3**: WP4, WP5–Implement Penguard Guardian service (routines
    for sending status messages, atomic commitment protocol), implement
    PLS

-   **Phase 4**: WP4, WP6, WP7–Implement various events (group merge,
    penguin add...), refine UI, implement calibration routine

-   **Phase 5** (optional): WP8–Design and implement PPP

-   **Phase 6**: WP9, WP10–Extensive field testing, prepare presentation

Deliveries
==========

We expect to deliver the following:

-   Code for the Penguard Android application

-   Code for the PLS

-   Documentation for the PGP

-   (optional) Documentation for the PPP

-   Slides for the one-minute presentation
